FPGA: Add `fpga_template` sample (#1262)
oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples: DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/GettingStarted/experimental/fpga_template/README.md

| What you will learn               | Best practices for creating and managing a oneAPI FPGA project
| Time to complete                  | 10 minutes

> **Note**: Even though the Intel DPC++/C++ OneAPI compiler is enough to compile for emulation, generating reports and generating RTL, there are extra software requirements for the simulation flow and FPGA compiles.
>
> To use the simulator flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition and one of the following simulators must be installed and accessible through your PATH:
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition
> - Questa*-Intel® FPGA Starter Edition
> - ModelSim® SE
>
> To use the hardware compile flow, Intel® Quartus® Prime Pro Edition must be installed and accessible through your PATH.

> **Note**: In oneAPI full systems, kernels that use SYCL Unified Shared Memory (USM) host allocations or USM shared allocations (and therefore the code in this tutorial) are only supported by Board Support Packages (BSPs) with USM support (e.g. the Intel® FPGA PAC D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX) `intel_s10sx_pac:pac_s10_usm`). Kernels that use these types of allocations can always be used to generate standalone IPs.

> 

Reviewer: Add this section: 

````{verbatim}
## Prerequisites

This sample is part of the FPGA code samples.
It is categorized as a Tier 1 sample that helps you getting started.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
   tier1("Tier 1: Get Started")
   tier2("Tier 2: Explore the Fundamentals")
   tier3("Tier 3: Explore the Advanced Techniques")
   tier4("Tier 4: Explore the Reference Designs")
   
   tier1 --> tier2 --> tier3 --> tier4
   
   style tier1 fill:#f96,stroke:#333,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier2 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier3 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
   style tier4 fill:#0071c1,stroke:#0071c1,stroke-width:1px,color:#fff
```

Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.
````

## Purpose

> Use this project as a starting point when you build designs for the Intel® oneAPI FPGA compiler. It includes a CMake build system to automate selecting the various command-line flags for the oneAPI FPGA compiler, and a simple single-source design to serve as an example. You can customize the build flags by modifying the top part of `src/CMakeLists.txt`: if you want to pass additional flags to the Intel® oneAPI FPGA compiler, you can change the `USER_FLAGS` and `USER_HARDWARE_FLAGS` variables defined in `src/CMakeLists.txt`. Similarly, you can add additional include paths to the `USER_INCLUDE_PATHS` variable. You can also explictly define these variables at the command-line if you don't want to make change to the CMake build system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this project as a starting point when you build designs for the Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler when targeting FPGAs. It includes a CMake build system to automate selecting the various command-line flags for the oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler, and a simple single-source design to serve as an example. You can customize the build flags by modifying the top part of `CMakeLists.txt`: if you want to pass additional flags to the Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ compiler, you can change the `USER_FLAGS` and `USER_HARDWARE_FLAGS` variables defined in `CMakeLists.txt`. Similarly, you can add additional include paths to the `USER_INCLUDE_PATHS` variable. You can also explicitly define these variables at the command-line if you don't want to make change to the CMake build system.
```

> **Note**: The code sample in this design only uses USM for improved code simplicity as compared with buffers/accessors. The included CMake build system can also be used for designs that do not use USM.

| Variable              | Description
|:---                   |:---
| `USER_HARDWARE_FLAGS` | This space-separated list of flags applies only to flows that generate FPGA hardware (i.e. report, simulation, hardware). You can specify flags such as `-Xsclock` or `-Xshyper-optimized-handshaking=off`
| `USER_FLAGS`          | This space-separated list of flags applies to all flows, including emulation. You can specify flags such as `-v` or define macros such as `-DYOUR_OWN_MACRO=3`

> | `USER_INCLUDE_PATHS`  | This semicolon-separated list of include paths applies  to all flows, including emulation. Specify include paths relative to the `src/CMakeLists.txt` file, or using absolute paths in the filesystem.

Reviewer: They should all be semi-column separated right? it's just that cmake adds the ; automatically when seeing a list? I'm surprised that this semi-column is needed for the USER_INCLUDE_PATH - as we discussed, this may be a cmake issue. But we can enforce ; on the other variables, could you try doing so?

set(SOURCE_FILES src/fpga_template.cpp)
set(TARGET_NAME fpga_template)

# Use cmake -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant> to choose a
# different device. Here are a few device examples (this list is not
# exhaustive):
#   intel_s10sx_pac:pac_s10
#   intel_s10sx_pac:pac_s10_usm
#   intel_a10gx_pac:pac_a10
# Note that depending on your installation, you may need to specify the full 
# path to the board support package (BSP), this usually is in your install 
# folder.
#
# You can also specify a device family (E.g. "Arria10" or "Stratix10") or a
# specific part number (E.g. "10AS066N3F40E2SG") to generate a standalone IP.
if(NOT DEFINED FPGA_DEVICE)
    set(FPGA_DEVICE "intel_s10sx_pac:pac_s10_usm")
endif()

# Use cmake -DUSER_FPGA_FLAGS=<flags> to set extra flags for FPGA backend
# compilation. 
set(USER_FPGA_FLAGS ${USER_FPGA_FLAGS})

# Use cmake -DUSER_FLAGS=<flags> to set extra flags for general compilation.
set(USER_FLAGS ${USER_FLAGS})

# Use cmake -DUSER_INCLUDE_PATHS=<paths> to set extra paths for general
# compilation.
set(USER_INCLUDE_PATHS ../../../../include;${USER_INCLUDE_PATHS})
```

> Everything below this in the `src/CMakeLists.txt` is necessary for selecting the compiler flags that are necessary to support the build targets specified below, and should not need to be modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything below this in the `CMakeLists.txt` is necessary for selecting the compiler flags that are necessary to support the build targets specified below, and should not need to be modified.
```

Author: fixed others as well

## Building the `fpga_template` Tutorial

> 

Reviewer: Please replace this not by: 
```{verbatim}
> **Note**: When working with the command-line interface (CLI), you should configure the oneAPI toolkits using environment variables. 
> Set up your CLI environment by sourcing the `setvars` script located in the root of your oneAPI installation every time you open a new terminal window. 
> This practice ensures that your compiler, libraries, and tools are ready for development.
>
> Linux*:
> - For system wide installations: `. /opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For private installations: ` . ~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For non-POSIX shells, like csh, use the following command: `bash -c 'source <install-dir>/setvars.sh ; exec csh'`
>
> Windows*:
> - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> - Windows PowerShell*, use the following command: `cmd.exe "/K" '"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" && powershell'`
>
> For more information on configuring environment variables, see [Use the setvars Script with Linux* or macOS*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html) or [Use the setvars Script with Windows*](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).
```

Reviewer: You have not updated this paragraph

> **Note**: If you have not already done so, set up your CLI
> environment by sourcing  the `setvars` script located in
> the root of your oneAPI installation.
>
> Linux*:
> - For system wide installations: `/opt/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
> - For private installations: `~/intel/oneapi/setvars.sh`
>
> Windows*:
> - `C:\Program Files(x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat`
> - For PowerShell*, use the following command: `cmd.exe "/K" '"C:\Program Files (x86)\Intel\oneAPI\setvars.bat" && powershell'`
>
>For more information on environment variables, see **Use the setvars Script** for [Linux or macOS](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-linux-or-macos.html), or [Windows](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-programming-guide/top/oneapi-development-environment-setup/use-the-setvars-script-with-windows.html).

> ### Running Samples in Intel® DevCloud

Reviewer: Remove this section

If running a sample in the Intel® DevCloud, remember that you must specify the type of compute node and whether to run in batch or interactive mode. Compiles to FPGA are only supported on fpga_compile nodes. Executing programs on FPGA hardware is only supported on fpga_runtime nodes of the appropriate type, such as fpga_runtime:arria10 or fpga_runtime:stratix10.  Neither compiling nor executing programs on FPGA hardware are supported on the login nodes. For more information, see the Intel® oneAPI Base Toolkit Get Started Guide ([https://devcloud.intel.com/oneapi/documentation/base-toolkit/](https://devcloud.intel.com/oneapi/documentation/base-toolkit/)).

> When compiling for FPGA hardware, it is recommended to increase the job timeout to 12h.

Author: comment on a code block

> ### Using Visual Studio Code*  (Optional)

Reviewer: Remove this section

   | Target          | Expected Time  | Output                                                                       | Description
   |:---             |:---            |:---                                                                          |:---
   | `make fpga_emu` | Seconds        | x86-64 binary                                                                | Compiles the FPGA device code to the CPU. Use the Intel® FPGA Emulation Platform for OpenCL™ software to verify your SYCL code’s functional correctness.
   | `make report`   | Minutes        | RTL + FPGA reports                                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generates an optimization report that describes the structures generated on the FPGA, identifies performance bottlenecks, and estimates resource utilization. This report will include the interfaces defined in your selected Board Support Package.
   | `make fpga_sim` | Minutes        | RTL + FPGA reports + x86-64 binary                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generates a simulation testbench. Use the Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition simulator to verify your design.

>    | `make fpga`     | Multiple Hours | Quartus Place & Route (Full accelerator) + FPGA reports + x86-64 host binary | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generate an FPGA image that you can run on a supported accelerator board.

Reviewer: It only generates an executable if a BSP was provided as a target

Author: reworded 
```suggestion
   | `make fpga`     | Multiple Hours | Quartus Place & Route (Full accelerator) + FPGA reports + x86-64 host binary | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and compiles the generated RTL using Intel® Quartus® Prime. If you specified a BSP with `FPGA_DEVICE`, this will generate an FPGA image that you can run on the corresponding accelerator board.
```

   | `make fpga_ip_export` | Minutes  | RTL + FPGA reports                                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL that may be exported to Intel® Quartus Prime software

   The `fpga_emu`, `fpga_sim` and `fpga` targets produce binaries that you can run. The executables will be called `TARGET_NAME.fpga_emu`, `TARGET_NAME.fpga_sim`, and `TARGET_NAME.fpga`, where `TARGET_NAME` is the value you specify in `src/CMakeLists.txt`.

### On a Windows* System
This design uses CMake to generate a build script for  `nmake`.

1. Generate the `Makefile` by running `cmake`.

   ```bash
   mkdir build
   cd build
   ```

   To compile for the Intel® FPGA PAC D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX), run `cmake` using the command:

   ```bash
   cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" ..
   ```

   You can also compile for a custom FPGA platform. Ensure that the board support package is installed on your system. Then run `cmake` using the command:

   ```
   cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
   ```

>    > **NOTE**: This design will **not** work on the Intel® PAC with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA, because the design depends on USM.

Reviewer: The pac boards are not supported on Windows so you can remove this comment

   | Target           | Expected Time  | Output                                                                       | Description
   |:---              |:---            |:---                                                                          |:---
   | `nmake fpga_emu` | Seconds        | x86-64 binary                                                                | Compiles the FPGA device code to the CPU. Use the Intel® FPGA Emulation Platform for OpenCL™ software to verify your SYCL code’s functional correctness.
   | `nmake report`   | Minutes        | RTL + FPGA reports                                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generates an optimization report that describes the structures generated on the FPGA, identifies performance bottlenecks, and estimates resource utilization. This report will include the interfaces defined in your selected Board Support Package.
   | `nmake fpga_sim` | Minutes        | RTL + FPGA reports + x86-64 binary                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generates a simulation testbench. Use the Questa*-Intel® FPGA Edition simulator to verify your design.

>    | `nmake fpga`     | Multiple Hours | Quartus Place & Route (Full accelerator) + FPGA reports + x86-64 host binary | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL and generate an FPGA image that you can run on a supported accelerator board.

Reviewer: Same comment as for the linux target

Reviewer: You have not updated this Output command similarly to the Linux one

Author: updated

   | `nmake fpga_ip_export` | Minutes  | RTL + FPGA reports                                                           | Compiles the FPGA device code to RTL that may be exported to Intel® Quartus Prime software

   The `fpga_emu`, `fpga_sim`, and `fpga` targets also produce binaries that you can run. The executables will be called `TARGET_NAME.fpga_emu.exe`, `TARGET_NAME.fpga_sim.exe`, and `TARGET_NAME.fpga.exe`, where `TARGET_NAME` is the value you specify in `src/CMakeLists.txt`.

   > **Note**: The Intel® PAC with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA and Intel® FPGA PAC D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX) do not support Windows*. Compiling to FPGA hardware on Windows* requires a third-party or custom Board Support Package (BSP) with Windows* support.

   > **Note**: If you encounter any issues with long paths when compiling under Windows*, you may have to create your ‘build’ directory in a shorter path, for example c:\samples\build.  You can then run cmake from that directory, and provide cmake with the full path to your sample directory.

> ### Additional Documentation

Reviewer: Remove this section

- [Explore SYCL* Through Intel® FPGA Code Samples](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/explore-dpcpp-through-intel-fpga-code-samples.html) helps you to navigate the samples and build your knowledge of FPGAs and SYCL.
- [FPGA Optimization Guide for Intel® oneAPI Toolkits](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/oneapi-fpga-optimization-guide) helps you understand how to target FPGAs using SYCL and Intel® oneAPI Toolkits.
- [Intel® oneAPI Programming Guide](https://software.intel.com/en-us/oneapi-programming-guide) helps you understand target-independent, SYCL-compliant programming using Intel® oneAPI Toolkits.

> ### Troubleshooting

Reviewer: Remove this section

If an error occurs, you can get more details by running `make` with the `VERBOSE=1` argument (on Windows use `nmake` instead):

```
make VERBOSE=1
```

```
nmake VERBOSE=1
```

For more comprehensive troubleshooting, use the Diagnostics Utility for Intel® oneAPI Toolkits, which provides system checks to find missing dependencies and permissions errors. [Learn more](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/documentation/diagnostic-utility-user-guide/top.html).

> ### In Third-Party Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)

Reviewer: Remove this section

You can compile and run this tutorial in the Eclipse* IDE (in Linux*) and the Visual Studio* IDE (in Windows*). For instructions, refer to the following link: [FPGA Workflows on Third-Party IDEs for Intel® oneAPI Toolkits](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-oneapi-dpcpp-fpga-workflow-on-ide.html).

## Running the Sample

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU):

   ```
   ./fpga_template.fpga_emu     (Linux)
   fpga_template.fpga_emu.exe   (Windows)
   ```

2. Run the sample on the FPGA simulator device:

   > **NOTE**: you need to define the `CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1 environment variable in oneAPI 2023.1

   ```
   CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1 ./fpga_template.fpga_sim                       (Linux)

>    cmd /V /C "set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1&& fpga_template.fpga_sim.exe"   (Windows)

Reviewer: I'd rather use the same commands as in other samples for Windows: 
set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1
fpga_template.fpga_sim.exe
set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=
